---
widget: "blank"
headless: true  # This file represents a page section.

title: 'Introduction'

design:
  columns: "1"
---

Various political traditions have been seized with the questions: "what is the
meaning of freedom?" "who should enjoy freedom?" and "what is the content of
this freedom?". Different theoretical traditions provide different answers to
these questions. The starting points are different, and so are the emancipatory
visions. As an intellectual and political project, feminism grapples with
women's status in society, gender roles, gendered power relations and how
various political traditions exclude women from their visions of freedom. From
multiple angles, feminism provides a critical evaluation of the core claims and
visions of freedom contained in political traditions such as liberalism,
anti-colonial struggles, Marxism etc. This module will set up a conversation
between some of the major currents of feminist thought, and political
traditions such as liberalism, Marxism, and anti-colonial nationalism. With a
focus on the different strands of feminism and where they stand in relation to
these theoretical traditions, this module will explore broadened and enriched
ideas of freedom. The module will also explore how – through interventions like
queer theory – different currents of feminism have been challenged and
critiqued for their incompleteness, blind-spots and exclusions. At the end of
the module participants will assess whether feminism offers a radical vision of
freedom in a world that is punctuated by horrifying levels of gender-based
violence, inequality, the policing and surveillance of women's bodies, and a
lack of reproductive justice.

This module aims to answer these questions:

1. How does feminism help us to defend freedom?
2. How does feminism give us expanded notions of freedom?
3. How does feminism give us insights that are neglected in other traditions?
