---
title: "The Personal is Political: Assessing Feminist Fundamentals in the Digital Age"
weight: 902
---

(This reading is part of [Activity 9: The feminist challenge: how feminism expands ideas of freedom][activity-9].)

[activity-9]: {{< relref "activity-9#task" >}}

----

**By Frances Rogan and Shelley Budgeon, 9 August 2018[^1]**

[^1]: This is an adapted and shortened version of the paper. 

The slogan, ‘the personal is political’, has its origins in a paper of the same
title authored by Carol Hanisch. It was published in 1970 as part of a
collection of essays called *Notes from the Second Year: Women’s Liberation*.
Hanisch was motivated to write the paper in defence of Women’s Liberation
Movement groups who were emerging out of existing radical movements such as the
Civil Rights movement, the Anti-Vietnam War movement, and Old and New Left
groups. Because these movements tended to be male-dominated, the specificity of
women’s oppression was not deemed relevant to the political struggles these
groups defined as their focus. 

As women from these movements began to organise and name their oppression,
Hanisch recounts how the women within the Women’s Liberation Movement were
‘belittled’ to no end for trying to bring their so-called ‘personal problems’
into the public arena, especially ‘all those body issues like sex, appearance,
and abortion’. Their concerns were regarded as *isolated* ‘personal’ issues best
addressed through individual initiative, and as such, not the proper focus for
radical political organisations associated with existing leftist movements. The
practice of consciousness raising (women gathering together to discuss their
own oppression) was condemned as mere ‘personal therapy’ or ‘navel gazing’. 

A number of linked threads, which run through Hanisch’s essay, warrant
unpacking as they form the basis for a fundamental feminist theory of the
constitution of gender relations, which continues to resonate with contemporary
critiques of gender relations. These threads broadly fall under four
interrelated categories: (i) **power** (ii) **the separation between the private and
public realm** (iii) **political action** (iv) **and everyday experiences**.

![](/images/banner-with-seven-demands.jpg)

## Second-wave Fundamentals

Feminism, like liberal political theory, endorsed the tenet which holds
individuals are ‘free and equal beings who are freed from the ascribed,
hierarchical bonds of traditional society’. Demands by second-wave feminism for
the full extension of liberal principles and rights to women represented a
significant move towards the completion of the liberal project. The failure of
liberalism to deliver on this promise, therefore, was a central plank in the
politics of the Women’s Liberation Movement. Without an adequate theory of
power, grasping the limits of liberal theory was not possible. Hence,
understanding that women’s exclusion was the product of the essentially
*patriarchal* constitution of liberal thought was a critical element in
developing feminist critique. 

Carole Pateman’s 1983 classic essay begins with the assertion that ‘the
separation between the private and the public is central to almost two
centuries of feminist writing and political struggle; it is, ultimately what
the feminist movement is about’. A theory of patriarchal power was brought to
bear in her critique of liberal political theory, and in so doing, she drew
together a set of theoretical principles that explained the oppression of women
as the product of historically specific structures of domination and
subordination.

*Liberalism is an individualist, egalitarian, conventionalist doctrine;
patriarchalism claims the hierarchal relations of subordination **necessarily
flow from the natural characteristics** of men and women. In fact, the two
doctrines were successfully reconciled through the answer given by the contract
theorists in the seventeenth century to the subversive question of who counted
as free and equal individuals (Pateman 1983, p. 283, emphasis added).*

The justification for not extending rights to women relied fundamentally upon
the separation of spheres whereby political power in the public sphere was not
to be confused with paternal power which governed familial relations in the
private sphere. The exercise of male power over women in the private sphere was
commonly understood to arise out of nature and as such was fundamentally
different from the forms of power which governed the public sphere. Patriarchal
power operated to produce gender as a relation founded on ‘natural’ male
superiority and not the product of structural social relations. Women (wives)
as natural subordinates could not be ‘free and equal’. Thereby, an inherent
contradiction in liberal political theory was resolved (Pateman 1983, p. 284).

Second-wave feminism challenged and politicised this assertion of natural
difference and the associated conviction that it would be ‘unnatural’ to extend
the rights of the free individual and autonomous subjecthood to women.

This analysis of patriarchal power illustrates that gender inequality depends
upon denying that particular aspects of everyday life have political
importance. By asserting that issues such as sexuality or the body are not
‘merely’ private matters second-wave feminism politicised socio-spatial
relations structured by the gendered public/private distinction. In the
introduction to the anthology of writings from the WLM, *Sisterhood is Powerful*,
editor Robyn Morgan explains the unique nature of the collection highlighting
the way it combines ‘all sorts of articles, poems, graphics and sundry papers’
that reflect a range of experiences *defined by women* as central to their
oppression. The variety of topics covered and the formats of expression
employed illustrate that ‘Women’s liberation is the first radical movement to
base its politics—and, in fact, create its politics—out of personal
experiences. We’ve learned that those experiences are not our private
hang-ups’. Second-wave feminism significantly extended critical understanding
of how power flows through the micro level interstices of everyday life.

*Whatever else feminist politics have done in the last decade, they have
broadened the concept of the political.* In saying “our politics begins with our
feelings”—rather with our exercise of the franchise (vote)—feminists are
drawing attention to the fact that the field of what is usually considered
political is a created one. Politics, in any and every sense, is about power,
and it is as much about the power that men, wittingly or unwittingly, exercise
over women as it is about the power that presidents and prime ministers wield
over nations. 

The insight that laid bare the power relations governing ‘private’ experience
led to more nuanced understandings of what types of activities could form part
of a broader political movement concerned with the advancement of women’s
interests. Practices such as consciousness raising were not, therefore, merely
individualistic personal therapy but rather provided the basis for generating
identification with a wider collective social experience that arose out of
specific social and political forces. As Hanisch argued in 1969 in defence of
consciousness raising groups, it is a ‘political action to tell it like it is,
to say what I really believe about my life instead of what I’ve always been
told to say’ (Hanisch 2006). Practices which seemed to be about women’s
everyday lives and experiences were theorised as fundamentally political.

*Our politics begin with our feelings …. The political unit in which we can
discover, share and explore our feelings is the small group. Raising our
collective consciousness is not a process that begins and ends, but is
continuous and necessary given the enormous pressure placed on us everywhere to
deny our own perceptions (San Francisco Redstockings 1969, pp. 285–86).*

This approach to theorising experience was also central to the ‘personal
genesis of Black Feminism’ which arose from ‘the seemingly personal experiences
of individual Black women’s lives. For women of colour, the act of claiming the
specificity of their oppression became foundational to a politics which
challenged both the sexism they experienced within their own communities and
the racism they experienced within predominantly white feminist communities.
Moreover, naming their oppression exposed the ‘false universalism of “women’s
experience” ‘(Phipps 2016, p. 305).

Finally, the slogan encouraged the notion that these practices, undertaken in
places and spaces not conventionally defined as political, would contribute to
the development of new female political *feelings (or subjectivity)* that would
enable women to speak as autonomous political subjects. These included not only
those rights conventionally assigned to the individual within traditional
liberal political theory, but a set of newly *self-defined* rights that related
to issues such as sexuality and the body.

*In order to create an alternative, an oppressed group must once shatter the
self-reflecting world which encircles it and, at the same time, project its own
image onto history. In order to discover its own identity as distinct from that
of the oppressor, it has to become visible to itself… As we begin to know
ourselves in a new relation to one another we can start to understand our
movement in relation to the outside world. We can begin to use our
self-consciousness strategically. We can see what we could not see before
(Rowbotham 1973, pp. 27–28).*

In summary, by theorising gender as a product of patriarchal power relations,
the Women’s Liberation Movement extended the definition of politics to areas of
everyday life formerly trivialised and understood as natural, challenged
conventional norms that defined political action, and developed a set of
strategies that allowed women to discover the political nature of their
experiences as the foundation for activism.
