---
title: 'Freedom Declaration: Freedom as Independence'
weight: 803
---

(Part of [Four Conceptions of Freedom][four].)

[four]: {{< relref "readings/four-conceptions-of-freedom" >}}

----

In the struggle against the political, social, economic and cultural conditions
of colonialism, anti-colonial movements and their theorists imagined ways to
change, re-order and transcend. These anti-colonial imaginations informed
struggles in the different waves of decolonisation. These three waves are as
follows:

* The 1st phase of decolonisation (1776 to 1826) brought about the national
  independence of most of the European colonies in North, Caribbean and South
  America (‘New World’)

* The 2nd wave of decolonisation (1839 to 1931) in the dominions and ‘Old
  World’

* The 3rd wave of decolonisation refers to the end of colonial rule after 1945
  or WWII in mostly Third World (Africa and Asia)

There was no single imagination of how to organise society after colonialism.
Varieties of freedom contested each other. In the post WWII period – the period
of African and Asian independence – freedom became closely associated with the
idea of forming sovereign nation states. In this framework, decolonisation had
the following dimensions:

1. It would provide freedom from foreign rule and domination
2. It would create space for colonised people to chart their futures – self
   determination
3. Independence would provide space to advance radical social and economic
   programmes which in some cases included socialism.

This conception also had strong emphasis on economic freedom. Colonialism was
seen as linked to exploitation of the colonised people and the exploitation of
the resources in the colonised countries. Independence was also about having a
final say on how the wealth and natural resources of these different societies
could be restored to the people.

The anti-colonial project was also framed as a people’s project to get back
what had been taken away from them. It was a form of popular sovereignty.

The drive for freedom as independence also came from below. Colonised people’s
calls for political rights and other privileges of citizenship carried greater
emotional force and seemed more attainable when cast in terms of their
particular place and community than references to the “international
proletariat” or “pan-ethnic identities”.

While nationalist appeals could inspire the masses, the masses could complicate
campaigns to win independence. In order to engage peasants, wage labourers,
market women, and other ordinary people, the leadership of the independence
movements had to address their concerns in ways they could understand. It
became necessary for anticolonial campaigners to grapple with land, labour, and
taxation issues that were located most directly within the colonial realm
itself.

And it became necessary for them to appeal to local constituencies in their own
cultural registers, drawing on their dress, dialect, customary practices,
religious symbols, and other modes of meaning in order to attract support. The
structural constraints of colonialism itself helped to channel the energies of
its opponents toward national objectives. The transportation and communication
infrastructures that anticolonial activists relied upon to reach their
supporters and spread their messages—roads, railways, postal systems,
newspapers, and so on—were contained for the most part within colonial
boundaries. In this formulation, the social and economic demands made by the
masses could be met through independence.

The resistance of the independence movements fundamentally called into question
the colonial order and sought to establish a new order. The leading figures of
the anticolonial movement in the 20th century consciously employed the rhetoric
of revolution and spoke of the defeat of colonial rule in revolutionary terms.
For example, Frantz Fanon (1925–1961)wrote the following in his main work The
Wretched of the Earth: "Decolonisation, which sets out to change the order of
the world, is clearly an agenda for total disorder".Ho Chi Minh (1890–1969),
the founder and leader of the Viet Minh movement for Vietnamese independence,
deliberately sought to portray the declaration of independence of his country
from France as standing in the long tradition of the American and French
revolutions of the 18th century.[9] While the colonisers used terms such as
"rebellion" and "insurrection" in their attempts to depict anticolonial
resistance directed against them as criminal attempts to overthrow legitimate
authority, the anticolonial movement employed the concept of revolution as a
legitimising title for their struggle for independence

[9]: http://ieg-ego.eu/en/threads/europe-and-the-world/european-overseas-rule/fabian-klose-decolonization-and-revolution

Socially and culturally, colonialism was a racist system. The era of "modern"
nineteenth-century imperialism was also the era of scientific racism.
Colonialism, mediated through racism and racist policies, limited and even
forbade meaningful cross-cultural dialogue between coloniser and colonised.
Throughout most of Africa and Asia, racism was "not an incidental detail, but …
a substantial part of colonialism." Harsh, brutal, and deliberately
discriminatory treatment at the hands of European colonisers was the constant,
painful reminder to Africans and Asians that they were a colonised and
humiliated people. All nationalists, irrespective of ideological differences,
were generally agreed that such treatment was indefensible; it must be ended.

It is important to understand that the idea of freedom as independence was not
the only game in town or the only option favoured by those seeking freedom from
colonialism. Another option that is often not spoken about was the idea of
freedom that was not tied to state sovereignty or the idea of a nation state.

Léopold Senghor (Senegal) and Aime Cesaire (Martiniue in the Caribbean)
promoted the idea of freedom as a co-existence with the former colonial
metropole – France. Under this scheme, France would be transformed from a
colonial nation to a democratic federation in which former colonies had a stake
and voice – a transcontinental arrangement that brought the coloniser and the
colonised together in one polity. For Senghor and Cesaire, colonial
independence was not synonymous with freedom. They promoted a form of
anti-colonial cosmopolitan that reconciled and reconstituted different worlds.

Source: Dave Kennedy, *Decolonisation: A Very Short Introduction*, 2016
