---
title: 'Freedom Declaration: Rights and Equality'
weight: 802
---

(Part of [Four Conceptions of Freedom][four].)

[four]: {{< relref "readings/four-conceptions-of-freedom" >}}

----

## Introduction

The central theme in this conception of freedom is a commitment to the
individual and the wish to build a society in which people can satisfy their
interests and achieve their desires. In this framework, human beings are first
and foremost, individuals who are endowed with the ability to reason. All
people are born with rights which they hold by virtue of being human beings.
These rights are universal and exist, whether or not they are recognised by
government or other players in society. They cannot be taken away from
individuals (they are inalienable). Examples of these rights include the right
to life, property and equality. The major claim is that “we are all born equal”
and should enjoy equality and liberty.

## History of these ideas

These ideas of freedom are associated with three historical events: the English
Revolution (1640-1688), the American Revolution (1776-1786) and the French
Revolution of 1789. Freedom, viewed in this way, was a radical challenge to the
feudal system – a deeply hierarchical and unequal system. The ideas were given
impetus by the breakdown of feudalism and the rise, in its place, of a market
capitalist society. In many ways, it reflected the aspirations of rising middle
classes whose interests clashed with the established political power of the
monarchs and landed aristocracy.

This conception of freedom was considered radical because it challenged the
absolute power of the monarchy and the idea that the rule of the king was
founded by “divine right”. Advocates of this view called for constitutional and
representative government. They criticised and challenged the political and
economic privileges of the landed aristocracy and the unfairness of the feudal
system in which privileges were hereditary and social position was determined
by the “accident of birth”. They questioned the authority of the church and
advocated for freedom of conscience.

## Debates within this conception of freedom

What unites people subscribing to this conception of freedom is a basic
commitment to the idea that every individual should have maximum freedom to
pursue their own individual projects that are an expression of their autonomy.
This principle guides attitudes to the role of the state, relationships that
individuals or citizens have with others as well as how the economy should be
organised.

Like all ideas that attempt to understand society and change it, this
conception of freedom has changed over time and has undergone different phases.
This evolution and the internal debates that happen among those who are guided
by this conception of freedom has resulted in at least two major camps.

### 1. Freedom as non-interference:

For the one camp, freedom means the absence of force or coercion.

On the one side of the coin is the belief that freedom is the leeway for
individuals to make choices about key aspects of their lives, enter into
contracts with each other and be free from excessive government interference.
The emphasis is that freedom is best realised when we are free from
interference from the state or other individuals.

For those who fall in this camp, freedom is best affirmed and promoted by
having a state that plays only a minimal role in the economy- allowing the
market to be the main instrument determining the allocation of goods and
services in society and a state that does not interfere in the personal lives
of individuals. In South Africa today, examples would include the Free Market
Foundation’s insistence that the state’s regulation of the labour market
through interventions like minimum wages amounts to interfering with the market
and undermines the rights of those who are desperately in need of a job to
choose to work for lesser amounts without bridging the law. Policies such as
affirmative action is also criticised for undermining individual’s ability to
compete on an equal basis for jobs. The market enhances freedom by using its
own mechanisms of supply and demand to distribute goods and services to sellers
and consumers and to match employers with job seekers.

### 2. Freedom as Equal Opportunity

The second camp is sensitive to the reality that although people can be told
that they have the right to choose, there are other factors that can stand in
the way of freely making choices. The emphasis here is that due to history,
personal circumstance and cultural factors, some people cannot freely claim
their rights to choose.

This camp argues or recognises that choice is shaped by context and that it not
enough to say that individuals are free to choose. Individuals are only able to
maximise their freedom and to exercise the right to choose only when there are
real opportunities to do so. The social context within choices are made must be
taken into account and there is a role for the state to facilitate the process
of claiming freedoms and making choices.

In the South African context, adherents of this camp have argued that the
history of colonialism and apartheid has brutally robbed black people of the
ideal social conditions to exercise freedoms, choice and their agency. The
remedies for this situation often include policies for redress in the field of
education, health, employment and so on.

## Securing freedoms – democracy and civil liberties

Although there are divergent views on the role of the state and the extent to
which the market should be free to operate without any interference, there are
other demands and beliefs that unite those who subscribe to this vision.

Many believe in a form of political rule that allows individuals as citizens to
elect a government of their choice and hold it accountable through a range of
checks and balances. This **‘social contract’** between individuals and the state
is an important way of protecting individuals from the tyranny of the majority
and for reigning in those individuals who might violate other’s choices.

At a practical level, this involves regular competitive elections through which
a constitutional government can be put in place, political pluralism that is
guaranteed by the existence of multiple competing political parties or
organisations and the separation of powers by having a separate executive,
judiciary and legislature

{{% alert secondary %}}

Unless otherwise indicated, this section was put together from Andrew Heywood (2017)
Political Ideologies: an Introduction – sixth edition, Chapter 2 (Liberalism) Palgrave
Mcmillan

{{% /alert %}}
